Editorial Note

     It is often believed that exposure to the outside world,
even if it brings in its train the exploitation of the domestic
economy by foreign capital, is nonetheless a powerful means of
dissolving the existing pre-capitalist forms of social
relationships. It is on this basis that "globalisation" is seen
by some as a possible counterweight to the persistence and
exacerbation of communalism and by others as a force undermining
the caste-system through its promotion of a more or less uniform
brand of capitalism, albeit dominated by metropolitan capital.

     "Globalisation" however is not an entirely new sui generis
phenomenon, but a long process marked by different phases, of
which the term as commonly used refers only to the latest one. It
follows then that if this belief in its "dissolving" effect were
justified, then one would have seen this effect in operation even
during the colonial period which also was a particular phase of
"globalisation". The article by M.M.M. Mahroof on the Sri Lankan
caste-system lends support to the contrary view: of the three
different colonial powers that dominated Sri Lanka, the
Portuguese and the Dutch openly used the caste-system for their
own purposes, while the British, after some initial liberal
noises, also adjusted themselves to it. What is more, the
improvements in-transport that they introduced which brought
people closer, denied the anonymity that had been used earlier as
a means of moving up the caste-ladder, and, in that sense,
indirectly strengthened the caste-system.

     Of course, the very fact of Sri Lanka having a caste-system,
admittedly without any notion of pollution associated with it,
may appear intriguing. The question of the attitude of Buddhism
to caste-system, which it raises is discussed, among other
things, in the Indian context by Vivekananda Jha's paper. While
tracing the origins of caste and untouchability the paper draws
attention to the essentially timid and compromising attitude of
Buddhism and Jainism to caste. This only underscores the need to
look at caste in material social terms rather than in exclusively
religious terms as is usually done.

     Manjit Singh's paper on agrarian capitalism raises afresh
several theoretical issues over which a debate had raged in the
seventies. He makes the important point that the level of ground-
rent in farms under petty-tenancy gets raised because of the
competition exercised by the capitalist farms who are also
desirous of leasing in land and have the ability to pay high
rents because of the higher surplus they extract through the use
of superior methods of production. This point, first noted by
Wolf Ladejinsky in the early seventies, argues against any
position which takes the ground rent associated with petty
tenancy as an exogenously-given entity by the capitalist farms;
it does however invalidate the
     2    SOCIAL SCIENTIST

view that the existence of petty tenants who can pay higher rents
by cutting into subsistence constitutes a brake on the spread of
capitalist production.

     Policies of "structural adjustment" are usually sought to be
justified on the grounds that they would usher in large amounts
of productive, as distinct from speculative, capital flows to the
third world. The paper by Subhash Sharma giving figures on net
Direct Foreign Investment into developing countries shows that
the vast bulk of it went into just ten countries, in east and
southeast Asia and in Latin America. Since the case of China is
somewhat special (involving overseas Chinese who contribute over
two-thirds of the DFI), and south-east Asia can no longer be held
up as a "model", the empirical picture drawn in the paper is
instructive.

     Finally, as we go to press, news has come of Amartya Sen
getting the Nobel prize for economics for this year. We publish a
short piece by Utsa Patnaik, herself a student of Sen, relating,
from a Marxist perspective, to Sen's work on agriculture, poverty
and famines.
