    





    Book Reviewsl97
    
WALTER HAWSER, ea., Swami Sahajanand and the Peasants of Jharkhand:
    A View from 1941, Manohar, 1995 pp. xxiii + 369. Map, Rs 450.
    
    Walter Hauser has added one more feather to his cap by so ably translating,
    annotating and editing, as the meticulously prepared endnotes and glossary
    show, yet another of Swami Sahajanand Saraswati's little-known tracts,
    written in 1941, which had remained unpublished so far, Jharkhand ke
    Kisan. This work once again establishes Hauser's credentials as the fore-
    most authority on the Swami, his many-faceted life and his movement. The
    Swami evolved from a narrow social base when he espoused social reform
    within a caste, into the foremost peasant leader of his time, at the national
    level. He was keen to promote the cause of the peasant everywhere. Little
    wonder he discovered peasants everywhere including the Jharkhand region
    with which he was not adequately familiar. His Jharkhand tract belongs to
    the last phase of his life. It is not based on any firsthand. intensive study of
    the tribal history of agrarian struggles and the unique tribal agrarian system
    or on extensive contact with the tribal people. It is based on his tours,
    one of which led him to spend a delightful midnight at Mahuadand, where
    tribals, 'scantily clothed', sang and danced around a winter bonfire.
    
    The tract is even today a good introduction to Jharkhand, its geography,
    culture, including noteworthy qualities of life', and language, the mode
    and manner of exploitation of tribal people and their resources. The book
    is rich in insights. It is almost prophetic in the use of the terms like
    Jharkhand in 1941, long before the emerging tribal middle class, then
    engrossed in Adibasi Mahasabha politics, adopted the Jharkhand name for
    their political party in 1950. Swamiji's use of the concept of Jharkhand was
    apparently derived from his knowledge of Sanskrit texts. Interestingly, he
    derives from such texts words like vankhand or vanshand ( p. 12). He does
    not explicitly locate the term Jharkhand in Sanskrit texts like Chaitanya
    charitamrit. or in medieval chronicles, or within the folk and tribal usage of
    this term as evident from the current names of villages or tracts.
    
    The Swami further seeks to reconstruct the identity of Jharkhand peasants
    (kisan) in the image of the pucca kisans of central Bihar whom he knew
    only too well in the course of his struggles and encounters. It is not that he
    did not know that the 'peasant' of Jharkhand depended on land and forest
    and that his rights in forest were being eroded. He identified the critical
    issues concerning land and forest in Jharkhand. Yet he failed to relate
    structurally the issues of land and those of forest and their close relation-
    ship. The tribal peasant of Jharkhand is still both part peasant and part
    non-peasant; the two dimensions enmesh in the specific situation of Jhark-
    hand.
    
    Similarly, while the Swami recognises the specific needs of Jharkhand
    peasants in terms of a series of administrative, political and social measures
    that he recommends, he argues for the enactment of one agrarian law not
    

    





    only for the whole of Bihar but also for the application of the Bihar
    Tenancy Act with some modifications to Jharkhand (p. 200). The Swami is
    apparently not much aware of the long-drawn agrarian struggles of the
    tribals of Jharkhand that had led to the enactment of a series of agrarian
    measures long before the Bengal Tenancy Act was enacted. These struggles
    led lo special enactments for the Santal Pargana and Chotanagpur. He
    ignores not only the tradition of tribal activism (except in case of the
    Tanabhagats) but also the contemporary activities of Theble Oraon on the
    Kisan front in Chotanagpur. The Swami discusses the merits of the local
    Acts and their shortcomings. In some aspects, these provisoes were far too
    advanced. They upheld the principle of inalienability of tribal land, or of
    'restricted' transfer of land, recognised the tribals' right to reclaim landÄ
    which was also traditionally accepted by old zamindars of ChotanagpurÄ
    and permitted commutation of pracdial conditions. The agrarian conditions
    in Bihar were far too disparate to permit of a single, uniform agrarian law.
    
    Yet there are some unique features of this text. It makes a distinction
    between the core region of Jharkhand and its periphery, and deals with
    their problems separately. For the first time it draws attention to the
    problems of bonded labour in Hazaribagh and Palamau and demands its
    abolition. It also demands the abolition of the Tatas' zamindari, which
    became part of the left agenda later.
    
    However, the tract suffers from some factual errors: Lineage-based
    ownership of landÄhe calls it village ownership of landÄwas not confined
    only to the Santal Pargana, but also existed in parts of Ranchi and Singh-
    bhum; cooperative societies became bankrupt elsewhere but the Roman
    Catholic Co-operative Society among the Munda and others was a roaring
    success.
    
    It is further interesting that Swamiji wrote about Jharkhand peasants
    and agrarian issues at a time when the tribal leaders of political movements
    who demanded autonomy had put the land and forest question on the
    back burner. In fact, as tribal political aspirations were articulated by the
    Adibasi Mahasabha and later by the Jnarkhand Party, agrarian issues
    receded into the background. The situation is not very different even
    today, in spite of the rapid erosion of tribal rights in landÄand its alienation
    on a large scaleÄand in forest. Politics is a strange alchemy, blending and
    bringing tribals and non-tribals together and in the process diluting tribal
    issues concerning land and forest. Therefore the publication of this tractÄso
    admirably updatedÄis a timely reminder that land and forest questions
    concerning tribal people which are now part of an international agenda on
    environment and indigenous people can no longer be ignored.
    
    K.S. Sir
    
    