   15 August 1997 TELEGRAPH 

------------------------

Front Page
  
 *No icons, only their echoes 
  
  *President appeals for people’s crusade against corruption 
  
  *Assam rebels strike again 


NO ICONS, ONLY THEIR ECHOES  
                     
 
FROM K.P. NAYAR 

New Delhi, Aug. 14  

The differences stood out in stark contrast. As
India awakened to its second tryst with destiny,
commemorating the golden jubilee of the first, it
was obvious that beneath the facade of the
midnight function in Parliament’s Central Hall,
everything else had changed beyond recognition. 

“A moment comes, which comes but rarely in
history, when we step out from the old to the
new, when an age ends...”, Pandit Jawaharlal
Nehru had said at the same place at precisely the
same time 50 years ago and was repeated in a
taped extract last night for midnight’s children
and those born thereafter. 

But as members of both houses of Parliament, the
new President of the republic, former MPs,
survivors of the Constituent Assembly,
distinguished guests from abroad, ambassadors
and high commissioners resident in New Delhi
and a host of others who have influenced India’s
destiny for half a century gathered last night in the
circular hall where the Constitution was framed, it
was not an occasion to step out from the old to
the new. 

Nor was it an end of another age, as Nehru had
described the dawn of August 15, 1947. The new
had already replaced the old so thoroughly and
nowhere was it as obvious as in the Central Hall
where President K.R. Narayanan, addressed the
commemorative gathering. 

It is wrong to describe the midnight gathering in
Parliament as a re-enactment of the session in the
Central Hall which ushered in freedom for India. 

The golden jubilee session was held in thrall by
the voices of two men who were not present at
India’s tryst with destiny — Mahatma Gandhi and
Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose. It was the relay of
Netaji’s message to the nation which drew the
largest and the most spontaneous applause from
those gathered in the Central Hall. It was clear the
vast majority of new generation MPs were hearing
Netaji for the first time: even when they were not
clapping, they vigorously responded in body
language to what he was enunciating. 

Freedom fighters naturally dominated the
midnight session in 1947. Rajendra Prasad,
Babasaheb Ambedkar, Shyama Prasad
Mookerjee...their list is long. 

There were freedom fighters among those in the
Central Hall tonight. But nothing underscored the
change that had overcome India’s political
landscape as their complete absence from the
podium. 

It was also a sign of the times that Narayanan’s
pointed references to corruption were received by
those gathered in the Central Hall like water off a
duck’s back. But the President’s references to
Ambedkar drew loud applause. 

At the end of it all, only one ritual had not
changed: the rendering of Sare Jahan Se Achcha
and the national anthem. It was Sucheta Kripalani
who sang these 50 years ago. This time it was
Lata Mangeshkar’s turn to recall Iqbal’s tribute to
the nation.     


               
               

   PRESIDENT APPEALS FOR
 PEOPLE’S CRUSADE AGAINST
          CORRUPTION  
                     
 
FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT 

New Delhi, Aug. 14  

At the stroke of the midnight hour fifty years on,
President K.R. Narayanan set up the nation for
another tryst: with a destiny free of corruption. 

“It seems the people have to be in the forefront of
the fight against corruption....A social movement
or a widespread national movement is needed to
cleanse the system,” the President said,
addressing the historic midnight special session
of Parliament to mark the golden jubilee
celebrations of Independence. 

A full house of MPs listened poker-faced as the
President opened fire on the “sheer opportunism
and valueless power politics” that had displaced
“principles and idealism” and the “criminalisation
of politics”. 

Choosing this momentous occasion to voice his
feelings on the kind of politics being practised in
the country, Narayanan said: “I am painfully
aware of the deterioration that has taken place in
our country and in our society in recent times.
The traditional cultural and spiritual values which
have been the mainstay of our civilisation seem to
be losing their grip over society and politics”. 

The words he chose to describe the degree of
corruption that pervaded political activity were
telling. He said: “Corruption is corroding the
vitals of our politics and our society.” 

The President’s outburst comes at a time when
politicians are enraged over increasing instances
of judicial activism. Only yesterday, MPs had
come to blows in the Lok Sabha over the Patna
High Court’s observation that the situation in
Bihar merited imposition of President’s rule. 

Narayanan’s comments also come after several
politicians have been linked to scams over the
past two years and the high drama in Bihar over
Laloo Yadav’s refusal to quit. Political observers
described the speech as one which has not
evaded the single most important issue facing the
nation and has confronted it directly. 

The speech must have had the endorsement of
the Prime Minister, who himself translated
Narayanan’s speech into Hindi. I.K. Gujral could
not have translated the speech unless he agreed
with Narayanan’s outburst against corruption.
Narayanan quoted Mahatma Gandhi to drive
home his point: “Corruption will be out one day,
howeversomuch one may try to conceal it: and
the public can, as it is its right and duty, in every
case of justifiable suspicion, call its servants to
strict account, dismiss them, sue them in a law
court, or appoint an arbitrator or inspector to
scrutinise their conduct as it likes.” Narayanan
explained that the kind of social movement he
envisaged need not be negative.     


 ASSAM REBELS STRIKE AGAIN  
                     
 
FROM MONIMOY DASGUPTA 

Guwahati, Aug. 14  

Assam militants again targeted the railways to
strike terror on the eve of Independence Day,
killing seven train passengers in a bomb blast and
cutting off North-east’s rail links with the rest of
the country. 

Two coaches of the passenger train were blown
up in North Lakhimpur district this morning, when
extremists detonated a remote-controlled bomb.
Seven persons were also injured in the blast on
the metre-gauge line at Chumoni, 12 km from the
Salonibari railway station. There are several
defence units near the blast site. 

A Northeast Frontier Railway spokesperson said
the two rear coaches of the
Rangapara-Murkongselek local took the impact of
the blast. The victims were in the last coach. 

The bomb attack came hours after 15 wagons of
a cargo train carrying oil derailed on the
sabotaged tracks between Dangtol and Basugaon
in Kokrajhar district. The incident cut off
North-east’s rail links with the rest of the country.
On Monday, passengers of the Guwahati-Delhi
Rajdhani Express had a narrow escape, when a
blast missed the train by barely five seconds. 

After today’s incident, chief minister Prafulla
Kumar Mahanta requested the Union railway
ministry to increase the strength of the Railway
Protection Force (RPF) in the state. He felt
“additional RPF personnel were required to
protect the tracks”.     

 ------------------------
National Page

  
      
      Left gives in to Basu on oil price hike 
      
      Last-minute burst of joy clears Pak clouds 
      
      MPs fuss over translation of President’s speech 
      
      Hindi too harsh on Rabri tongue 
      
      CBI rapped for Kesri clean chit 
      
      Kesri bid to make peace with Antony, Mamata 
      
      Special police to guard Mumbai shooting spots 
      
      Patriotism dances to pop tunes 
      
      Army on alert in Kashmir 



               
               

 LEFT GIVES IN TO BASU ON OIL
           PRICE HIKE  
                     
 
FROM MONOBINA GUPTA 

New Delhi, Aug. 14  

West Bengal chief minister Jyoti Basu has
convinced senior members in the CPI(M) and
CPI not to oppose the proposed hike in
petroleum prices. 

To offset the adverse impact of the hike, Left
leaders have also asked Prime Minister I.K. Gujral
to persuade the Congress not to go on an
offensive against the United Front on the issue. 

After resisting a hike for months, the Left finally
relented, realising the Front would otherwise be
unable to break out of the oil pool stranglehold.
Before the Standing Committee met yesterday,
Mr Basu urged senior Left members to be
reasonable while opposing the hike. Though the
next rung of leadership and the party rank and file
are still to endorse the hike, the Left top brass
believe there is no other way of covering the huge
oil-pool deficit. 

The deficit, that stands at Rs 25,000 crore, is
soon expected to escalate to intractable
proportions. The only other way the Front can
avoid a price hike is by borrowing from the
international market. But this will have a more
adverse impact on the economy. 

There is speculation the recent dinner meeting
between Mr Gujral and Mr Basu had much to do
with the Left’s softening of stance on the issue.
Mr Gujral has been pleading with the Left that his
government does not have any soft options and it
is better to take hard decisions now than allow the
problem to spin out of control. 

The Left is worried the hike may give the
Congress an additional handle with which to beat
the Front government. The Congress high
command has already come out in the open
against the proposed hike. This is why Left
leaders are keen that Mr Gujral neutralise the
Congress’ offensive. 

With the Left having mellowed its stand, the
government is likely to announce a formal
decision next Thursday. The Left is hoping the
Front will cushion the blow by increasing the
quantum of rice and wheat to be distributed
among the poor through the public distribution
system.     


               
               

  LAST-MINUTE BURST OF JOY
     CLEARS PAK CLOUDS  
                     
 
FROM HASAN ZAIDI 

Karachi, Aug. 14  

Pakistan was a country divided by age on the eve
of its 50th anniversary of independence. 

At the level of the state and elder intelligentsia,
Pakistan’s golden jubilee celebrations were almost
overshadowed by the passage yesterday in the
lower House of Parliament of a controversial
anti-terrorist Bill that gives the law enforcement
agencies wide-ranging powers — including the
right to arrest without warrant and to shoot to kill
on the mere assumption of terrorist intent —
ostensibly to deal with sectarian violence. 

The Opposition walked out of the National
Assembly terming the new legislation a “black
law” while the Human Rights Commission of
Pakistan called the new law “a curious golden
jubilee gift.” 

Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif’s address to the
nation from a hastily convened National
Assembly session at 12.01 am last night was also
mostly bereft of any grand vision of the previous
or coming 50 years and focused more on a
defence of the new piece of legislation. It was
hardly what Pakistanis had expected to mark the
beginning of the country’s 50th birthday bash. 

But on the ground, almost as if stung by the
media criticism of the lack of visible joy and
disgusted by the politicians’ lack of grace, young
Pakistanis took to the streets with a vengeance.
Cars, motorbikes, rickshaws and cycles
festooned with Pakistani flags had started doing
the rounds of Karachi’s roads since early evening
last night. By midnight, roads such as Karachi’s
equivalent of Wall Street, the I.I. Chundrigar
Road, were jam-packed with traffic and
youngsters singing and dancing in the middle of
the street to the music pounding out from car
stereos and loudspeakers. 

In contrast to even only a day earlier, the streets
were alive with people come to “see the lights”
and the sound of ebullient honking of car horns.
Buildings swathed in yellow, green, red and blue
fairy lights — and, in the case of one, a giant
lighted 50 — presented a riot of colour in
combination with the swirling mass of green and
white flags. 

“Till yesterday I was depressed about the lack of
celebrations,” shouted out a young man to me
above the din of bhangra and breakdance behind
him, “but today I am so happy to be a Pakistani. I
feel real pride!” 

The scene was repeated in most parts of the city.
Spontaneous dance competitions were held on
roundabouts while some neighbourhoods had
organised singing competitions or music concerts
that began after midnight and continued well into
the morning. Sweets were distributed in the city
and late-night tea kiosks did roaring business
catering to high-spirited revellers. 

The jubilant mood was helped by the common
shopkeepers, office owners and private flat
residents who had, at the last minute sensing the
lack of an atmosphere of celebration, chipped in
to illuminate their shops and buildings. 

An English columnist reflected this aggressive
reaction to the intelligentsia’s preoccupations in
this morning’s paper, even as groups of young
people still roam the streets with flags and
buntings. “Birthdays are for being sentimental
and, if possible, happy,” wrote Ayaz Amir in
today’s Dawn. “They are not occasions for
drawing up a balance sheet of the cosmos.”     


               
               

 MPS FUSS OVER TRANSLATION
   OF PRESIDENT’S SPEECH  
                     
 
FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT 

New Delhi, Aug. 14  

Acrimony has not ceased in the Rajya Sabha even
on the eve of the fiftieth anniversary of India’s
Independence. In today’s Zero Hour, bitter
feelings surfaced over the translation of the
President’s speech during the special midnight
session of both Houses of Parliament. 

BJP members wanted to know why the United
Front government had departed from convention,
and asked Prime Minister Inder Kumar Gujral to
translate President K. R. Narayanan’s speech into
Hindi. 

Mr Narayanan will deliver his speech in English.
His speeches in the past, including the one given
at the function when he took over as President,
were translated by Rajya Sabha Deputy
Chairperson Najma Heptullah. 

Minister of state for parliamentary affairs Jayanthi
Natarajan replied: “The government has a limited
role to play in the matter. In fact, it has no role in
this. The function is being organised elsewhere. If
the House so wishes I can convey its sentiments
to the Speaker.” 

But the assurance came with a rider. “I do not
know if it is proper to convey the sentiments of
the House to the Speaker,” Ms Natarajan said. 

A howl of protest followed Ms Natarajan’s
intervention. BJP’s T.N. Chaturvedi accused her
of “misleading the House”. 

When the minister protested and said, “I believe
in certain principles, and do not mislead the
House,” Mr Chaturvedi’s retort was, “What
principles does she have? She is a Congress
member sitting in the treasury benches.” 

The Tamil Maanila Congress, to which Ms
Natarajan belongs, is an offshoot of the
Congress, but it has not yet been recognised as a
separate block in the Rajya Sabha. 

But Gurudas Dasgupta of the CPI came to Ms
Natarajan’s rescue and told Mr Chaturvedi his
comments were unwarranted. 

The discussion was initiated by V. K. Malhotra
(BJP) who demanded to know why a
time-honoured precedent was broken by the
government 15 days before the midnight session
on Independence eve.     

---------------
The East page


            





            
  
  
      
      More powers to West Bengal panchayats 
      
      Freedom chronicles fade out 
      
      Red alert in Tripura for I-Day functions 
      
      Manipur cabinet vows to protect state territory 
      
      15 killed in Meghalaya road mishap 
      
      48 villages to boycott I-Day celebrations 
      
      Boycott calls may mar I-Day celebrations 



               
               

    MORE POWERS TO WEST
     BENGAL PANCHAYATS  
                     
 
BY A STAFF REPORTER 

Calcutta, Aug. 14  

The government today decided to offer more
administrative powers to panchayats, allowing
them to plan and execute projects of almost half
of departments in their respective areas. The
decision is likely to have a far-reaching impact on
powers and functions of departmental ministers,
district planning committees and panchayats. The
panchayats will handle 29 departmental works,
including power, irrigation, roads and education. 

The decision was taken at a Cabinet meeting at
Writers’ amidst stiff opposition from Left Front
constituents like RSP and CPI. CPI and RSP
ministers felt the role of ministers was being
marginalised while that of the panchayats
enhanced. This is especially since most
panchayats are controlled by the CPM. 

Finance minister Asim Dasgupta defended the
decision saying the 73rd and 74th Amendments
have made it mandatory to vest more powers in
the panchayats. 

Nearly 50 per cent of West Bengal’s Plan funds
are already being spent through panchayats. The
Cabinet decision would help usher in more
decentralisation. Now, the administrative relations
between different departments, district planning
committees and panchayats will have to be clearly
defined. “It was easier said than done,” Mr
Dasgupta said. 

RSP and the CPI ministers were not convinced.
They expressed fears of misutilisation of public
funds, and a reduction in their role. “Who will
answer the people if panchayats misuse funds?”
asked PWD minister Kshiti Goswami, who
belongs to the RSP. 

Irrigation minister Debabrata Bandopadhyay also
crossed swords with Mr Dasg-upta. Water
resources minister Nandagopal Bhattacharya of
CPI also opposed Mr Dasgupta, calling it “an
unwise decision”. 

The Front partners highlighted rampant misuse of
Central funds for rural development schemes by
panchayats, and warned of an escalation.     


               
               

  FREEDOM CHRONICLES FADE
               OUT  
                     
 
BY A STAFF REPORTER 

Calcutta, Aug. 14  

The story of India’s Independence has practically
been wiped out from the National Library.
Readers and students carrying out research on
events which led to Freedom will come across
only yellowed, moth-eaten, brittle and illegible
pieces of some newspapers at the library’s
Esplanade East reading room. 

To commemorate 50 years of Independence,
National Library will hold a week-long exhibition,
“15th August 1947: Momentous Events on that
Particular Date”, starting August 19. 

There is hectic activity in the microfilm,
reprography and bibliography divisions, where
the staff are trying to salvage whatever newspaper
editions have survived. But it is a near-impossible
task, as a number of editions have been damaged
beyond repair. 

New director Ramanuj Bhattacharya admits some
newspapers of that time have turned “brittle as
there is no arran-gement at Esplanade reading
room for protection and preservation”. 

Agreeing that previous administrative heads
“ought to have” microfilmed all editions, Mr
Bhattacharya said: “There was no previous
project to preserve such priceless documents. It
will now hopefully be done in the Ninth Plan.” 

The Esplanade reading room has already
dispatched about a dozen English newspapers in
various stages of decay, to National Library’s
bibliography division. 

These newspapers cannot be accessed by
ordinary readers since they need “more than
careful handling”. Although the micro-film
division was set up in 1969, little effort was made
to preserve the papers. A library official says:
‘‘They are kept in such poor condition that
readers will not like to have the dirt on their
dresses”. 

The library does not have a single edition of any
Bengali newspaper describing the saga of
Independence. Efforts are on to photocopy
relevant portions, but till now it has proved a
difficult, if not impossible, task. In several cases,
old positives of prints from microfilm are being
used, but they are in parts.     


               
               

  RED ALERT IN TRIPURA FOR
        I-DAY FUNCTIONS  
                     
 
FROM OUR CORRESPONDENT 

Agartala, Aug. 14  

The Tripura government has put all security
forces, including the police, on maximum alert to
foil any possible attempt by militant groups to
disrupt the golden jubilee celebrations of
Independence tomorrow. 

All police stations in the “disturbed” as well as in
the interior areas have been asked to remain on
round-the-clock vigil and extend full cooperation
to the state administration in celebrating
Independence Day. Besides, all other security
forces, including the military and Assam Rifles,
have also been asked to stand by to face any
eventuality. 

To ensure fool-proof security, the state
government has imposed restrictions on entry into
the local Assam Rifles ground where the main
official function of Independence Day will be
held. Only invited guests, mediapersons, officials
and ministers will be allowed into the ground. No
vehicle will be allowed to pass through the main
gate after 9 am. Also, visitors will not be allowed
to carry any bag, club or stick. 

Deputy chief minister Baidyanath Majumder will
hoist the national flag on the Assam Rifles ground
as chief minister Dasarath Deb is ill and unable to
participate in the function. The AIR and Agartala
Doordarshan have been broadcasting the chief
minister’s speech appealing to the people to
defeat the conspiracy of militant groups as well as
to participate in the Independence Day
celebrations tomorrow in large numbers. 

The extensive preparations by the government on
security has been necessitated by the boycott call
given by the banned All-Tripura Tiger Force and
the National Liberation Front of Tripura militants.
Since early last month, the Tiger Force rebels
have been carrying on a propaganda asking
people to boycott the golden jubilee celebrations
of Independence Day. They have also threatened
officers of the state administration in the interior
areas to desist from hoisting the Tricolour. 

However, Brig. B.S. Chowdhury of the Assam
Rifles said he saw no reason to panic because of
the boycott call given by the militants. Brig.
Chowdhury, who has toured the interior areas of
the state extensively during the past week said the
forces were alert and there was no reason to give
much importance to the insurgents. 

But in spite of this, the government has sounded a
red alert and home minister Samar Chowdhury is
personally monitoring the situation. He was happy
over the positive response from the people
irrespective of political affiliations to foil the
insurgents’ boycott call.     


               
               

  MANIPUR CABINET VOWS TO
 PROTECT STATE TERRITORY  
                     
 
FROM OUR CORRESPONDENT 

Imphal, Aug.14  

The Manipur Cabinet, in an emergency meeting
last evening, has resolved to protect the territorial
integrity of the state at “any cost.’’ The Cabinet
also sought clarification from the Prime Minister
and the Union home minister on the issue. 

The main Opposition party, the Manipur Peoples’
Party (MPP), has set Sunday as the deadline for
the Centre to clarify its stand on the matter. MPP
president O. Joy Singh, said his party would
launch a non-cooperation movement if the Centre
failed to issue a statement on the matter. 

Hectic politicking started yesterday after a
Calcutta-based English daily quoted the National
Socialist Council of Nagaland (Isak-Muivah)
chairman, Isak Chisi Swu, as saying that the
Centre had accepted in principle the need to unify
the Naga-inhabited areas of the state under a
single administrative unit. 

The Cabinet took a serious view of the matter and
Nagaland chief minister S.C. Jamir reportedly
called up Manipur chief minister Rishang Keishing
after the news item appeared. Mr Jamir expressed
his displeasure over the report. 

Mr Jamir also convened a Cabinet meeting at
Kohima. However, the outcome of the meeting is
awaited. A senior Cabinet minister today said that
the state government had contacted the Union
home ministry officials last night to elicit response
on the matter. The home ministry termed the
report as “false.’’ 

Mr Keishing sent a fax message to Prime Minister
I.K. Gujral and home minister Indrajit Gupta after
yesterday’s meeting. He expressed his desire to
protect the territorial integrity of the state at any
cost. 

He urged the Prime Minister to clarify the
Centre’s stand in this regard. “There is
apprehension in the minds of the people and
tension is mounting among different communities
which may lead to a serious law and order
problem in the state,’’ Mr Keishing warned. 

Meanwhile the MPP has decided to launch its
agitation from August 18. The first phase will be
an indefinite hungerstrike by MPP leaders and the
second phase will be the resignation by the party
MLAs from the Assembly if the Centre did not
spell out its stand on the issue. The party
president said MPP will boycott the
Independence Day celebrations if the Prime
Minister did not make an announcement during
the midnight session of Parliament tonight.     


               
               

15 KILLED IN MEGHALAYA ROAD
             MISHAP  
                     
 
FROM OUR CORRESPONDENT 

Shillong, Aug. 14  

At least 15 persons were killed and 20 others
injured when a bus skidded off the road and fell
into a 50-foot gorge at Sohryngkham, about 30
km from here, around 4.30 am today. The police
said not a single passenger escaped unhurt. The
injured have been admitted to hospital. 

The driver of the bus, Shatra Singh and his
companion, Maiphu Singh, who escaped with
serious injuries, said they lost control while trying
to make way for a speeding truck. 

The bus, belonging to the Kangleipak Tours and,
Travels was coming from Imphal. Four of the
victims were women. 

Most of the luggage of the passengers are
missing. Some of the bags and suitcases were
found open. It is believed that local people had
robbed the dead passengers. Sources said one of
the passengers who regained consciousness at the
local civil hospital was heard asking for his
suitcase and waist band which contained Rs
30,000.     


               
               

48 VILLAGES TO BOYCOTT I-DAY
         CELEBRATIONS  
                     
 
FROM OUR CORRESPONDENT 

Shillong, Aug. 14  

A group of 48 villages along the
Assam-Meghalaya border has decided to boycott
the Independence Day celebrations tomorrow. 

The elders of these villages, situated in the
sensitive Block I and II areas, said they had
nothing to celebrate about as they had been
“orphans” for the last 47 years. The Union
government had failed to solve their problems,
they said. 

The people have been demanding since the late
Fifties that their villages be included in Meghalaya
as their population was contiguous with the Pnars
of the Jaintia Hills. They had opposed the Assam
government notification including the areas in the
Karbi Anglong District Council. They allege that
the Assam government had neglected them.
These areas have no roads, schools, hospital,
electricity or water supply. 

Meanwhile, the militant Hynniewtrep National
Liberation Council has called a 36-hour bandh
from 6 am today. A press release issued by the
outfit said today was its tenth foundation day and
that it had rededicated itself to the “cause of
freedom.” 

However, the powerful Khasi-Jaintia Presbyterian
Synod, one of the units of the Presbyterian
Church of India, has said that the golden jubilee
of Independence of “our beloved country is a
most joyful and eventful occasion.”     


               
               

BOYCOTT CALLS MAY MAR I-DAY
         CELEBRATIONS  
                     
 
FROM OUR CORRESPONDENT 

Imphal, Aug. 14  

Boycotts and bandhs have marked the run-up to
the year-long golden jubilee celebrations of the
country’s Independence. Several insurgent
groups and students organisations have called for
a boycott of the celebrations. 

Though the state government has geared up its
law enforcing agencies to tackle the situation,
tomorrow’s celebrations are not likely to rise to
great heights. Troops were seen patrolling the city
today as people rushed back home at sundown.
Late in the evening bomb blasts could be heard in
Imphal town. 

The venue for the celebrations has been shifted
from the Imphal polo ground to the First Battalion
Manipur Rifles’ ground due to security reasons
and the ongoing rains. 

Four militant outfits in the state, the United
National Liberation Front, the People’s
Revolutionary Party of Kangleipak, the Kanglei
Yawol Kanna Lup, and the Kangleipak
Communist Party, have called a 24-hour “public
curfew” from this evening to protest against “48
years of Indian colonial rule.” 

This followed an earlier declaration by the the
United Liberation Front of Asom, the Karbi
National Volunteers, the National Socialist
Council of Nagaland (Khaplang), the Tripura
Democratic People’s Front, the UNLF and
Prepak. They had earlier decided to boycott
Independence Day celebrations to protest against
“Indian domination of the Indo-Burma region.” 

The Kuki National Front also called a 48-hour
bandh from today in protest against the exclusion
of many outfits in the ongoing talks between the
Centre and the NSCN(Isak-Muivah). 

The Revolutionary People’s Front has also urged
the people to boycott the celebrations saying the
people of Manipur had nothing to be happy about
India’s Independence. The All-Manipur Students’
Union has also decided to boycott the
celebrations in protest against the Centre’s
“attitude” towards various problems.     

----------------
The Editorial


            





            
 
  
       
      Mind the State 



               
               

        MIND THE STATE  
                     
 

 

In India anniversaries are turned into rituals. Just
as deities are propitiated with the chanting of
appropriate mantras so national occasions have
their well known conventions, customs and
gestures. It will surprise nobody, therefore, if the
50th anniversary of independence is observed
along very familiar lines. Pious oaths will be taken
and self-righteous speeches delivered. A special
session of parliament was convened to
commemorate the meeting of the Constituent
Assembly on the midnight of August 14, 1947. It
is unlikely that the present Parliament will reflect
the sobriety of the gathering which met on August
14 half a century ago. All this will only add to the
prevailing cynicism. Yet a jubilee need not be an
occasion either for meaningless ritual or for
despair. Ideally it should invoke introspection
about the past and hope for the future. Only by
using time, as T.S. Eliot said, can time be
conquered. 

The hope and enthusiasm in 1947 were generated
by a sense of achievement. But that sense of
fulfilment contained within it a feeling of
inadequacy. The latter grew out of the awareness
that India had gained only a truncated
independence. This was compounded by the
realization among large sections of the people that
independence and partition were respectively a
gift and a curse of British rule. But pessimism
was drowned by the seething excitement of
freedom from foreign rule. 

The optimism was voiced by the prime minister,
Jawaharlal Nehru. He held out the promise of
making India a vibrant nation whose voice would
be heard and respected in international fora. His
project entailed making the state the central
agency of economic development. In foreign
policy, he chose to steer clear of the two camps
which had formed with the onset of the Cold
War. He wanted India to be a major force in a
separate Asian bloc. Socialism and non-alignment
became Nehruvian buzzwords. These were the
parameters for major policies. They determined
the mindset of a generation of politicians,
bureaucrats and members of the intelligentsia. 

Lost horizons 

The wisdom of hindsight gives one the
opportunity of comprehending that many of the
hopes and promises of those formative years
have been belied. State control spawned a
sprawling licence-permit raj that stifled
entrepreneurship and encouraged corruption.
Public sector units became sick and recipients of
state largesse. This drain on the exchequer was
coupled with mindless and increasing government
spending. The deficit in the budget spiralled
causing inflation and thwarting growth. This
process brought the economy to the brink of
disaster in the early Nineties. Yet in the intervening
period there was very little by way of a critique of
the Nehruvian shibboleths. Fifty years later, it is
clear that Asian countries which had looked up to
India as the pacesetter have forged ahead with
vibrant economies and higher standards of living.
In international affairs too, India’s influence and
importance have dwindled. The collapse of the
Soviet Union left Indian foreign policy high and
dry and it also exposed non-alignment to be what
it had become under Indira Gandhi: a highfalutin
cover for unequivocal support to the then Soviet
Union. The Nineties, therefore, opened with the
necessity of reviewing and repositioning India’s
political and economic agenda. The promise of
Nehru’s era had become a chimera. New times
needed new priorities. 

New priorities, as often happens in history, were
imposed by a profound crisis. In 1991 an external
debt crisis brought India close to defaulting on
international payments obligations. There was
accelerating inflation and the balance of payments
situation was precarious. International confidence
in India’s economy plummeted and credit became
impossible to obtain in international markets. To
save itself, India fell back on the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank. 

Blowing in the wind 

The offer of help from these two institutions was
accompanied by conditions to introduce policies
which would ensure macroeconomic stabilization
combined with fiscal adjustment and structural
reform. The economic reforms package which
was introduced by the then prime minister, Mr P.
V. Narasimha Rao, and his finance minister, Mr
Manmohan Singh, began the process of
dismantling the edifice of socialist planning and
reducing the scope of state ownership and
control. Indian markets were selectively opened
up to foreign technology and capital; decision
making was to be more transparent and the
economy more responsive to global trends.
These developments inevitably produced changes
in the orientation of foreign policy. Mr Rao took
definite steps to correct previous biases and
mend relations with the United States. 

These initiatives were, however, shackled by the
Nehruvian mindset. Mr Rao spoke time and again
of the middle path and of reforms with a human
face. The failure to take hard decisions which
would push through reforms led to a slide to
populism. The winds of change which Mr Rao
had brought with him died down once India was
overtaken by political uncertainty under
successive United Front governments. There is
the hope that the process of reform once started
will be irreversible; that the economy has turned
the corner; that individual initiatives once
unleashed will not succumb to forms of
collectivism. The promise can be realized only if
the nation has the will to attain the goal. In a
democracy, the people are responsible for the
politicians they elect. Politics reflects the priorities
of the people. The challenge of the future is to
change the mindset of the people. Time was when
being determined consciousness. In a changed
world, the mindset of the people will establish the
state of the nation.

----------- End of 15th Aug 1997 ---------------
              
