    





    SWAM! SAHAJANAND AND THE PEASANTS OFJHARKHAND: A View From 1941.
    Edited by Walter Hauser. New Delhi (India): Manohar Publishers and
    Distributors. 1995. xxiii, 369 pp. Rs. 450, cloth. ISBN 81-7304-108-3.
    
    THE AUTHOR is to be warmly congratulated for translating Swami
    Sahajanand'sJharkhand ke Kisan and for annotating the original text with
    informative editorial endnotes at the end of each chapter. Hauser and his
    publishers also provide us with the original Hindi text of Jharkhand ke Kisan.
    
    This allows readers who are more fluent in reading Hindi than I with a
    generous opportunity to check Hauser's skills as a translator. Insofar as I
    am able to judge, I would say that Hauser has done an admirable job.
    (Heuser is generous, too, in acknowledging his debts toJadunandan Prasad
    and K C. Jha) .
    
    Most students of north India will know Sahajanand as one of India's
    foremost peasant leaders in the twenty years leading up to Independence
    in 1947 (Sahajanand died in 1950). Sahajanand was especially active in
    Eastern U. P. and Bihar, as well as in the All India Kisan Sabha. As Hauser
    rightly notes, Sahajanand's radical political prospectus for Gangetic Bihar
    ran far ahead of that pursued by the locally dominant Congress party, who
    perceived him as "a serious threat" (p. xviii). Sahajanand may have started
    his political career as a proponent of the rural "well-to-do, or ... middle
    peasants," but in the 1930s he sided more and more with the "marginal
    poor...regardless of caste" (ibid.). This incipient radicalism was then
    deepened, asJharkhand ki Kisan shows us very well, by a two-year stint in
    Hazaribagh CentralJail,Jharkhand, following Sahajanand's activities in the
    National Anti-Compromise Week in April 1940. By 1940 Sahajanand was a
    supporter of Subhas Chandra Bose and a prime candidate for political
    imprisonment at the hands of the British.
    
    Much of what Sahajanand knew aboutJharkhand he learned in jail,
    from conversations with local political activists and from his own wide
    reading. Sahajanand admits that both he and the Bihar Provincial Kisan
    Sabha had been less than active in the districts of Chota Nagpur and Santal
    Parganas that make up the (Bihar) Jharkhand. It was normal at the time for
    leaders of the peasant and freedom movements to write offJharkhand as a
    tribal (adivasi) region where political vocabularies and peasant farming
    practices were poorly formed. Tribal India was exoticized by the British and
    looked down upon by caste Indians. It is remarkable, therefore, to find in
    Jharkhand ki Kisan an account of the underdevelopment of theJharkhand
    which speaks of the open looting of the region's resources and adivasis by
    Dikus (outsiders). This is the language deployed to such telling effect by the
    Jharkhand party in the 1950s, when it was demanding a separateJharkhand
    State in the federal Republic of India. In subtly different ways, it is also the
    language of theJharkhand Mukti Morcha today. More than that, Sahajanand
    provides an often persuasive empirical account of the processes which
    reproduce theJharkhand as an internal colony. After first outlining the
    region's culture and geography, Sahajanand turns to questions of zamindari
    rule and peasant landholdings. Thereafter he turns to "life in the jungle,"
    tenancy acts, usury and bonded labour, and peasant/tribal cooperatives.
    Throughout, Sahajanand resists the temptation to stereotypeJharkhandis
    as adivasis alone; he insists, rightly, that most adivasis in Jharkhand were, by
    1940, earning their living as peasants or mineworkers or even as agricultural
    labourers. Shifting cultivators and pure jungle dwellers were the exception
    
    not the rule. All of this gives Sahajanand's work a distinctly modern feel.
    Sahajanand's political concern to develop a Bihar-Jharkhand poor peasant
    alliance allowed him to cut through an ideology of tribal economy and
    society that has blinded so many commentators to the economic and

    





    political realities of Jharkhand. At times, no doubt, Sahajanand saw too
    much in the way of aJharkhandi class consciousness. But this is a minor
    gripe.Jharkhand ki Kisan is not a period piece. All students of Jharkhand will
    want to read this book. I am sure they will also want to join with me in
    thanking Walter Hauser for his excellent editorial work and for arranging for
    the book to be published.
    
                                     Universi, of Cambridge, U. K    STUART CORBRIDGE
    
    